Hello and welcome back to the course in
R programming in a previous tutorial
we talked about pictures operations and
I hope that you had a chance to practice
some of those basic addition subtraction
multiplication divisions and maybe some
logical expressions with vectors in
there vectorized form and that is
because I will leave that part for you
to explore in this tutorial we won't be
going through those basics in this
tutorial we will straightaway jump into
a very interesting experiment. We will
find out exactly why you should use
vectorized operations and R over be
vectorized operations. So let's get
straight into it and this tutorial will
consist of two parts in the first
tutorial I would like to explain
something to you about loops that might
cause confusion if we jump straight into
it in the second part and as soon as we
get that out of the way in the first
part we will proceed to our
investigation.
Alright so let's get started first thing
we're going to do is we're going to
create a vector X and we're going to put
five random numbers into the section. So
we do it like that where you know and
there are our five numbers now what we
want to do is we want to print out each
of these numbers or each of these
elements on its own.
How would we go about it from what we
already know well obviously would create
a for loop and we would say while I is
in X remember how in the challenge we
said while I isn't rnorm a hundred
well this is the same thing just the
differences that we've already created
this vector and we already storing these
five random numbers inside X so we can
say I in X so while is iterating over
the vector and then in the curly
brackets would say simply print I so now
if we're on this you'll see that these
numbers have been printed.
So what exactly happened here let's just
pause on this for a second what happened
here.
What happened is variable I was created
which you can see over here still still
live and what happened is this variable
in this loop or step-by-step went to the
inspector so first it assumed this value
and then this happened.
The value of the several is printed and
that's why we see this here then the
variable assumed this value and then
again this happened and that's why we
see this year then the variable assume
the next value and then this happened
again and that's why we see this and so
on and that happened five times so that
is how we are used to creating for loops
and are now let's say I wanted to print
out these values of x using the square
bracket so let's say I wanted to print
out the first value how would I do that
I would say print and then in the normal
brackets I would say x and then as we know from the
square brackets tutorial I would say X
square brackets 1 right so if I print
that you'll see that I've printed just
the first value now if I want to print
the second value same thing x to right and
I can just copy paste this like a monkey
three four five and so if I run this now
this is the second value third value fourth
value 5th value right so you can see that
I've printed all five of them
successfully by themselves.
Now what can you notice here ok you can
notice that every line here is identical
out of these five lines every line is
identical only thing that changes is
this number in the brackets right so it
was a 1 then it became a to then become
a 3, 4, 5 so this looks like actually an
iterative process right so you're doing
the same thing you just changing one of
the values
well whenever you see an iterative
process and whenever you can kind of
think that you're doing a monkey's job
you're just changing one number right
well then a loop can come in handy as
well right. A loop can take over and do
this changing for you so what would it
look like? It would look like print
x and then in the brackets instead of a
number would have an index so I not this
I you know what let's change it that's
not say I let's say J would have a number J
or a variable J that would change from
one to five and we would just use it
here to iterate over this process so
what the eye is doing here is a bit
different the I is actually iterating
over the actual element itself so that's
the I then that's the next I, that's the
next I, that's the next Iand that's
the next time and this is like an are
specific thing what we're talking about
here is for the j to iterate over 1 2 3
4 and 5 so this is a more conventional
approach that you would see in other
programming languages. So let's turn this
into a loop note how would we do it very
simple we just say 4 j in now we don't
want to trade over the vectors and
resources now we want to iterate over the
numbers from one to five so we'll say
from j 4 j in 1, 2, 5 and then we'll put our
current brackets a tab close the
brackets so what I want you to pay
attention to here is that this loop
already achieved the same result is a
bit different to this loop once again
this is let's add a comment
this is kind of conventional programming
loop right and this one is called are
specific programming loop right so here
we are just telling j to it's right over
the numbers 1, 2, 5 and then we're accessing
the vector that we're interested in X
through the square brackets and we're
by passing the the value of J to the
square bracket what we're doing here is
we're iterating over the vector itself.
So I is actually assuming the values of
the vector and we can only do that
because X is a vector and that is how r
operate so this is kind of like a
shortcut in our one showing you this
method now is because for what we're
about to do for the comparison of
vectorized 2 d vector operations are
going to know I need to know how to do
this loop right you won't be using this
kind of loops much in a in R
programming or the kind of loops for
that matter but anyway it's good to know
and plus we will need it today so I hope
that all makes sense because you really
need to get your hear all this for
the next part of this tutorial and now
let's proceed to that second part. I'm
going to put a line here so that we know
this is going to be the second part for
today.
Alright so what we're going to do here
in our second type apart
well we're going to actually compare so
we're going to compare vectorized
operations vs be vectorized right so
we've discussed that r is a vectorized
programming language and you can
actually just add two vectors together
we fought going through every single
element now what we want to see is what
is the difference between doing it that
way and doing it the conventional
standard programming language way.
Alright so let's skip started we're
going to create we're going to have
parameter we're gonna have a parameter
and and let's say it's going to be a
hundred just a hundred variables are
going to populate our vectors of hundred
variables will have a vector a and we'll
put into it a hundred normally
distributed of numbers then we'll have a
vector B and will also put a hundred
normally distributed numbers into that
vector right so let's run this is and
there's a and there's b perfect.
Now what we want to do is we want to
compare the difference between running a
vectorized operation and a de-vectorized right.
So let's put a comment in
so this is going to be vectorized
approach and then we'll have a comment
as well de-vectorized approach I think
I should put a dashing here.
Alright so let's do the vectors approach
first right. We want to create a vector C
and into that Victor we want to put
we're going to multiply A times B. A
times B done that's it that's one line
of code have finished now for de-
vectorized approach what we're going to
do is we're going to go through all
the elements and multiply them one by
one, so let's look over here this is A
this is B we're going to take a creator
loop and we'll take the first element x
the first element and stored in a
separate vector then we will multiply
this element by this element and put it
into that vector as well and we'll
multiply this element by this element
and put into that vector as well. So
let's see how we can arrange that
first we'll create a vector D and into
that vector what we're going to do is
we're going to create an empty vector so
we're going to use the replicate
function and we're going to replicate a
simple na so n/a stands for
not applicable or something like no
values not it's not existence so just
basically will create an empty vector
but what we're doing is we're allocating
memory.
We want to allocate enough memory
for this vector right so now we have
vector D which is a logical vector well
doesn't really matter what kind of type
it is and it has a hundred elements all
of which are n/a n/a n/a n/a so but
basically what that means is that now we
have a hundred spaces that we need to
feel while we're going to be multiplying
the two vectors and now we're just going
to add a simple for loop as we discussed
previously for I in one to end right
because we have n elements we're going
to learn what we're going to do is going
to say d with the index I what we want
to put in there is we want to put in a
with index I multiplied by b with the index I'm so
a bit and very similar to what we're
doing here. We are accessing to the
vectors element by element we're
multiplying them and putting the result
in to do, so let's go ahead and run these
two approaches so first of all let's run
approach for ecstasy and now let's run
this second approach the d vectors
approach and calculate vector D. Ok so
here we have extra see and vector D as
you can see from these two lines they're
identical so we've got the same result.
Now what are the differences here the
differences are obvious first of all
this is way shorter this is quite
cumbersome it takes some space takes
actually full lines and you've got a
loop your code more so it's visually not
as aesthetic and also it takes
more time to create this code but what
is an obvious right away is that this
approach is actually foster yes in R
vectorized operations are faster than to
vectorize depression and I can actually
prove it too so let's change and from
100 to 1 million so it's three zeros
there's six zeros so if I change and
like that now I rerun a and B and I run
this watch how long it will take around
pretty much instant right so now if I
run this first create the vector and
let's see how long this loop by self
will take around you can see it's taking
some time right now let's say I make a
10 million on that which how long it
will take this point for this to rent
that was like maybe half a second maybe
less
now let's allocate some space for d and
now let's run this part you can see it's
still thinking and it's still thinking
and again the computer is still thinking
even though we're chipping the same
result exact same result but just in a
different way it is taking longer there
we go.
So here you can compare that while both
vector are here you can actually see
them but the point is that this one took
way longer
so why is that and in fact this can come
as a surprise for those of you who have
experience in other programming
languages because a lot of programming
languages especially low-level
programming languages like C they will
work better if you break down operations
into small blocks like this, so if you
create a loop and see like this it will
work much faster than something that is
similar to a vectorized operation in
fact the programming language Julia it also
has vectorized and de-vecectors approaches
well in Julia if you create a vectorized
approach it will be longer than D
vectorized approach. So the opposite the
flip happens there
so why is that why is that the case and
here we'll get into a bit of like
technical details around R which you
might not come across in other tutorials
or in other books that you read on R
but I think it's important because it
helps you better understand what's going
on in the programming language in the background and
also helps you optimize your code and
ultimately produce better script. So
what's happening is our is a high-level
programming language and things like
this vectorized operations and function
called and so on.
Even we fought you realizing it what it's
doing is its delegating those things
those calculations to programming
languages like C and fortran in the
background so you can't see this
happening and you think that R is
doing this calculation or are a
performing a function that you've called
executing that function but what is
actually happening is R is basically
acting as a rapper for C code or for
fortran code or for some other
programming language code and it's
basically calling that language to
perform its hard labor for R and what
it needs to do is when it's calling that
language for instance see it has to tell
that language what its passing what kind
of variables its passing and what needs
to be done and for instance here it has
to tell that delegating a programming
language it has to tell it that this is
going to be a double variable and this
is a double variable and this is a
double variable and you need to multiply
them and then assign them here and then
it has to do that.
What what do we have here it has to do
that 10 million times, so 10 million
times it has to tell see what kind of
variables is passing on and what they
need what needs to be done with them.
When you perform this approach what
happens is our relies on that
fundamental concept that we talked about
earlier that a vector can only contain
elements of the same type so
R will
know already that this vector can only
contain doubles right and this vector
can also only contain doubles because it
just has to look at one of them and it
will know because it knows that you
cannot mix different elements inside
vector so it will only have to tell the
other programming language one time
what kind of variables are being passed
and will only have to tell that
programming language exactly what to do
the multiplication and then the
assignment operation that are it will
only have to pass that information on
one time
and that is where the time is saved in
that delegation of tasks and then the
low-level programming language which is
C or Fortran it takes this operation and
breaks it down and then the loop happens
in there automatically and so that is
the second reason why you should use
vector Iser operations in R as opposed
to de-vectorize operation because
even though you might think it's faster
to do this in reality it's not it's much
faster in R to work with vectorize
operation.
Ok so I hope I didn't bore you to death
with that explanation I personally
believe that knowing the nitty-gritty of
the tool that you're working with can be
very beneficial for you in the long run.
Ok so that brings us to the end of
today's tutorial hope you enjoyed it and
I look forward to seeing you in the next
one until then, happy coding.